---
layout: post
title: "Three days of Vim: A delightful experience"
date: 2014/08/04
categories: vim
---

I have switched from GUI editors (like Sublime) to Vim and I will never look back.

At first it was a bit daunting to try to switch to Vim. (Well, duh.) But it was absolutely worth it. Here are some first impressions:

- I am *so much more* productive. Being able to *never* touch the mouse is an amazing thing. Saying that I can do things five times faster would not be an exaggeration.
- I have taken my place in the editor wars: **Vim > Emacs**. I tried Emacs once. It felt so... *awkward* bending my fingers around to try to reach the modifier keys and the other keys and just gahhh. And when I first tried Vim, it felt much more natural - insert mode is `i`, append is `a`, etc.; everything just seems *right*.
- The learning curve is a myth. I can assert fairly certainly that I currently am able to harness about 5% of the power that Vim provides, but the assumption that Vim is almost impossible to handle at first is completely **wrong**. Run through `vimtutor` and a few online guides and you'll match the productivity level of your old editor in no time, and then some.
- Sidenote: I now find it incredibly annoying that I can't use Vim commands elsewhere (even after only 3 days). I keep trying to move with `hjkl` and stuff like `w`/`b`/`f`/`t` and their inverses in other applications like Chromium. Heh.
- Also, mapping Caps Lock to Ctrl helps. Even in other applications, where "CapsLock-F" is easier to hit than Ctrl+F from the home row. (And Caps Lock is useless anyway, so might as well do something useful with it.)

So why do I think Vim is so amazing, wonderful, magical, fantastic? Here is the small fraction of Vim's capability that I've been able to grasp in three short days:

---

## Movement

### `hjkl`

Seems trivial, but when you just want to shift your cursor a character or two, hitting a key on the home row is much easier than having to move all the way to the arrow keys. And I thought having to move over to hit `h` was going to be annoying, but usually I'm using other more efficient movement commands anyway. Such as...

### Word, sentence, line, and paragraph movement

Let's say the cursor is on the first letter of the following text and you want to move to the "a" in "pineapples":

    Vim is an amazing text editor. Vim is a wonderful text editor. Vim is the best text editor.

    Potatoes taste like potatoes. You already knew that. Potatoes do not taste like pineapples.

    This is the final paragraph. Yay.

I could do that really easily: `}}B4l`. Move past the second paragraph, jump back a word, and move four characters left. Now let's say I want to move from here to the first "taste"? `^w` (or `0w`). *Much* quicker than fumbling around with the arrow keys or the mouse.

I can safely say that commands like `wbWB{}()` have cut the time it took me to write this article at *least* by 25%. That's not an exaggeration.

### Finding text (i.e. Better Than Ctrl+F)

Vim has all the standard finding features - `/{{insert text here}}` to search, `?` to search backwards, etc. (and you don't have to reach for Ctrl+F; they're right there by your left pinky). But Vim has so much more to offer.

First of all, `*` and `#` (find the next / previous occurrence of the word under the cursor). Those are incredibly useful. And `%`, which jumps to a matching paren / bracket, which is amazing for writing code (and sometimes for just plain text).

But the commands I use even more often are `f` and `t`: "find" and "'til" (until). It's so convenient to be able to jump right to the next `.`, for example, by just hitting `f.`. But these (and also the movements in the previous paragraph) can be much, much more useful -- more on this in the next section.

### Moving between lines

This one's a bit more minor, but it's nice to be able to jump to a line with `<number>G` when you get a "error on line 123," for example. Jumping to the top with `gg` and the bottom with `G` is also useful for small files.

## Vim's "Language"

Well, so far, there's been a few nice things, but nothing that would really convince me to go through the trouble of learning and switching to an entirely new editor (actually, the movements are pretty amazing, but still). So why am I, after using Vim for three days, still able to claim that Vim is the best editor I have ever used? This is that killer reason.

### Verbs, nouns, and adjectives

For example, let's take the `c` command, which will `c`hange stuff (delete it and put you in insert mode to replace it with something). The selling point of Vim (to me), aside from its wonderfully efficient movements, is that if you can move somewhere, you can give that movement (noun) to a command (verb) and it'll *just work*. For example (in these examples, the cursor is `|`:

- `cc`: the basic form of the command; change a single line
- `c5c`: change 5 lines
- `cw`: "change word," or change `I ate |good pie` to `I ate | pie`
- `c3w`: "change 3 words"
- `c$`: change to the end of line
- `ct/`: "change 'til slash," or change `I like |eating pie / other stuff` to `I like |/ other stuff`
- `ci"`: "change in quotes," or change `print("This is so|me text");` to `print("|");`
- `ca*`: "change around star," or change `This is *rea|lly* amazing` to `This is | amazing`

And you can do this with **any command**!

Vim is delightful.

## Easy access to useful things

With Vim, all the power is literally right under your fingertips. Like, *directly* under them. No fumbling around with arrow keys or the mouse or modifiers; for basic tasks you'll barely ever need to touch the Ctrl key (Emacs, anyone?).

You can countless things in Vim with only lowercase letters that can only be matched with mouse / Ctrl / etc. in other editors.

### No Ctrl is faster than Ctrl

Want to undo? `u`. Doesn't seem too much faster than Ctrl+Z, but it definitely adds up. One tiny keystroke a single key away from your left index finger is most assuredly faster than reaching all the way down for Ctrl+Z.

Other examples? `y` for yank instead of Ctrl+C, `d` for delete / cut instead of Ctrl+x, `p` for put / paste instead of Ctrl+v. Not having to reach for Ctrl can save lots and lots of time.

A few other things: `v` for visual select (basically the same as holding down shift, and then some), `^` and `$` instead of Home and End, `?` and `/` instead of Ctrl+F, etc. etc. etc.

### Insertion wherever you want

The power to insert in so many different places from where your cursor is is really great:

- `ia`: insert before or append after respectively
- `IA`: insert at front or end of line
- `Oo`: open a new line before or after the current line
- `Rr`: replace multiple or one character
- Commands like `c` (change) that automagically bring you into insert mode

Contrast with other editors; for example, inserting at the end of the line requires moving your hand all the way over to the End key, as opposed to a quick `A` right there on the home row.

## Multitasking

### Buffers

Basically the equivalent of tabs in other editors, but they don't get in your way and they're only there when you need them. Most useful buffer commands that I use:

- `:e`: edit file (create new buffer)
- `:ls`: list buffers
- `:bn`: next
- `:bp`: previous
- `:bd`: delete (remove)

### Splits

Ability to view and edit multiple files at once (including the very same file). **Immensely** useful. Most useful split commands:

- `<C-w> s`: new split
- `<C-w> v`: new vertical split
- `<C-w> hjkl`: moving between splits
- `<C-w> c`: close (remove)

There are also `<C-w>` resizing commands that I sometimes use which you can pass a number to: `_` to set height, `|` to set width, `+-` to resize height, and `<>` to resize width.

## Magic

### `.` (dot)

This is pure wizardry. Repeats the last insertion command you just made. So if I want to transform:

    <code>hjkl</code>

into

    <code>h</code>, <code>j</code>, <code>k</code>, <code>l</code>

I can just type

    fha</code>, <code><Esc>l.l.

This is especially useful when combined with `/`, so you can just hammer `n.n.n.n.` repeatedly (which is really satisfying!).

### `=` (equals sign)

Auto-indent. Not much to say here; clearly it's particularly useful (and other editors have it also). To format an entire file, just hit

    gg=G

Also, `==` on a single line will format just that line. And there's also `>` and `<` to indent / dedent.

### `v`, `V`, `<C-v>`

Visual selection is nice and all (especially when you don't have to use the mouse or hold down shift), and those (`v` / `V`) deserve a mention (i.e. `J` to join lines of a selection), but the best part is the block selections with C-v.

They select a block, of course (still something you can't do in other text editors), but then you can do all sorts of magic to that block. You can insert text to the beginning of the first line (`I`) and all the other lines automagically have the same thing happen to them. All the normal commands work. It's great.

### `g;` and `g,`

More witchcraft. Ever gone off to look for some variable name or something and had to spend way too long to find your old place? Now just hit `g;` to jump back to your last edit (`g,` to go the other way).

Magical.

### `.vimrc`

No article about Vim is complete without mentioning the `.vimrc` file. Here's my favorite lines from mine:

Exit insert mode by hitting `j` and `k` at the same time:

    inoremap jk <ESC>
    inoremap kj <ESC>

This has the extra advantages that it's still a no-op in normal mode if you forget you already exited insert mode, and also that you can just hit both keys at the same time like a single keystroke.

Relativenumber:

    set relativenumber

Seeing line numbers is useless since I can just glance at the bottom of my screen for that (and jump to them with `G`), but seeing how far away a certain line is is really useful for passing numbers to commands.

## Dark Sorcery

Things I haven't learned and *really* want to learn, but can't until I fully grok the parts of Vim that I do know.

- Macros.
- Registers.
- Marks.
- The leader key.

---

Oh, and yes, I wrote this in Vim.
